# Deep Drug Repurposer Web Portal

## Summary
In 2017, the international pharmaceutical industry generated over USD 934 billion in revenue and is expected to grow to over $1,170 billion in 2021. [1] Although people are willing to pay for pharmaceuticals, the cost associated with creating a new, breakthrough drugs are costly and often unsuccessful. Only 12% of drugs that are in clinical phase will be approved for market. [5] Drug development for a single drug costs USD 2.6 billion and 17 years to develop on average. [5] Development regulations drive over 10 percent of this cost, averaging USD 339.3 million dollars. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requires three phases of clinical testing: determining human safety and dosing (phase 1), initial reading of efficacy and side effects (phase 2), and larger clinical trials to determine the safety and efficacy in larger numbers (phase 3). [3] Bypassing any stage in this process could create cost and time savings for drug development and reduce the burden on consumers. Even more, a breakthrough in drug-receptor repurposing could bypass toxicity stages in drug trials, and save tens of millions of dollars for a single effort to treat a disease. 

Now that we have developed a model that correctly classifies potential candidate drugs fill in the current accuracy of our model, we look to accomplish two objectives. The first is to optimize our model. We will conduct hyper parameter tuning, evaluate cutoff thersholds for our binary classifier, and determine best performance metric. The second is to build a web application. We will build a user interface (UI) that customers and researchers can utilize to find potential target genes given a specific pre approved drug. This UI will be deployed as a web portal that users can access. This tool will also enable researchers to include negative samples, drug, gene combinations that they tried and did not work to increase the models efficacy.  A user will be able to enter a specific drug receptor listed in the database, and the portal will produce a possible new drug. By creating an inviting, intuitive UI researchers will be more likely to use this platform to reduce production cost and hopefully increase the number of new drug gene cures.

## Proposed Plan of Research 

Our project will take place over the full semester, and is divided up into two stages. Stage 1 will be data curation, data transformation, and model construction. Stage 2 will focus on model enhancement and deploying the model on the web. Stage 1 is now complete. We were able to create fingerprints for both drug and gene,develop a validation set, create a negative sampling method, and develop an initial drug repurposer model. The remainder of the semester will focus on Stage 2.

# Stage 2

Now that the model is developed we will do a deeper dive into model validation and parameter tuning. Parameter tuning will consist of a grid search of candidate values for the following hyperparameters: number of layers, number of neurons, type of activation function, number of drop out layers, drop out layer percentage,number of epochs, batch size, and evaluation metric. We will use two hand curated datasets to validate the model. The datasets contain information on their interactions as a continuous kinase reaction scale, and we will need to pick values as cutoffs for binary classification. We plan on exploring the reaction scale distribution to select an appropriate cutoff. Using external datasets will be a powerful evaluation to determine our model effectiveness. Similar validations scores will suggest our model is learning scientific interactions, but a large discrepancy will show that there is a discrepancy between how our model performs on different datasets. We will use appropriate validations for classification such as precision, recall, and f1 scores.

Finally, we aim to deploy our model as a web portal. From a business perspective, having a good model will not help pharmaceutical companies unless they have good access to potential drug substitutions. A web portal/search bar will enable a user to enter a drug target, and will recommend a new alternative. We will evaluate Heroku, Google Cloud Platform, and Amazon Web Services for hosting our website and model. We plan to use JavaScript and HTML for the user interface and web callbacks. Additionally, we will need a database management system to manage new drugs as well as new negative samples that users input. To do so we will use Flask and mySQL.


## Preliminary Results
The prilimary results can be found at this link. The web platform is working and is linked to our database. If you input a drug that is a pre-approved drug, aka it exists in the database than the website will return a potential drug. If that drug does not exist then it will return an error message.

